
Gadar: Ek Prem Katha
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Gadar: Ek Prem Katha
Gadar - Ek Prem Katha (movie poster).jpg
Poster
Directed by	Anil Sharma
Written by	Shaktiman Talwar
Produced by	Nittin Keni Bhanwar Singh
Bhaumik Gondaliya
Starring	Sunny Deol
Ameesha Patel
Amrish Puri
Lilette Dubey
Narrated by	Om Puri
Cinematography	Najeeb Khan
Edited by	A. D. Dhanashekharan
Keshav Naidu
Arun V. Narvekar
Music by	Uttam Singh
Production
company	
Zee Telefilms
Distributed by	Zee Telefilms
Release date	
June 15, 2001
Running time	170 minutes
Country	India
Language	Hindi[1]
Budget	₹190 million[2]
Box office	est. ₹1.33 billion[3][4]
Gadar: Ek Prem Katha (transl. Rebellion: A Love Story) is a 2001 Indian Hindi-language romantic period action drama film directed by Anil Sharma and set during the Partition of India in 1947.[2] Loosely based on the life of Boota Singh, the film stars Sunny Deol and Amisha Patel in lead roles alongside Amrish Puri and Lillete Dubey.[3] Sharma's son Utkarsh as a child artist plays Deol and Patel's son, before his first film as an adult, another Sharma directorial Genius (2018).[4] Patel bagged Sakeena's role out of 500 girls who auditioned for the role.[5]

Budgeted at approximately ₹190 million (US$4.03 million), Gadar: Ek Prem Katha had a global cinema release on 15 June 2001, opposite Ashutosh Gowariker's sports drama Lagaan.[6] Despite receiving mixed reviews,[7] it grossed over ₹768.8 million (US$16.29 million) net in India and ₹1.33 billion (US$28.19 million) worldwide with a distributor share of ₹546 million (US$11.57 million), and went on to emerge as the highest-grossing Hindi film since Hum Aapke Hain Koun..! (1994).[8] Gadar: Ek Prem Katha is the second most-watched Hindi film in India since the 1990s, recording more than 50 million footfalls in India.[9] According to Box Office India, its adjusted gross in India is ₹4.86 billion (US$103 million) as per 2017 ticket sales.[10] The shy role of Deol was praised, earning him a Best Actor nomination at the ceremony of 47th Filmfare Awards, while Patel garnered the Filmfare Special Award as well as a nomination for Best Actress in the same function.[11] As of 2014, it has been one of the must-watch Bollywood films on the Partition of India.[12]


Contents
1	Plot
2	Cast
3	Production
4	Reception
5	Box office
6	Soundtrack
7	Awards
8	Sequel
9	See also
10	References
11	Bibliography
12	External links
Plot
During the Partition of India, the film tells the story of a truck driver, Tara Singh (Sunny Deol), a Sikh, who falls in love with a Muslim girl, Sakina '' Sakku'' Ali (Ameesha Patel), belonging to an aristocratic family.

The story begins with Sikhs and Hindus being attacked by Muslims in Pakistan when migrating to India by train from the railway station in West Punjab, Pakistan. In response, Sikhs and Hindus reply by killing Muslims migrating to Pakistan from East Punjab, India. During the Hindu-Muslim riots that erupted soon after the Partition, Tara also plans to kill Muslims. Still, he stops after recognising Sakina at the railway station, from the little Taj Mahal antique in her hands. He saves and protects her from a murderous mob chasing her because she failed to get onto the train with her family members after being lost in the crowd. As the mob attempts to rape and murder her brutally, Tara Singh defends Sakina by applying blood (implying sindoor) to her forehead to make her his Sikh Wife.

While driving back to Tara's house, the story has a major flashback showing Tara and Sakina's relationship during her college days. Still, the real ambition of Tara is to become a singer. Some girls in college who are friends of Sakina fool Tara to think that they have got him a spot on a music show in return for a favour. Tara performs badly in front of the music teacher, portrayed by Sakina. His friend then gives him tablets that help him prove his singing skills. Soon after, it is shown that Sakina is not the real music teacher, which saddens him. When performing on the music show, Sakina announces that she will not do her act, instead giving Tara a chance to sing despite being against the seniors' will at the college. Tara impresses everybody with his talent. While returning home after completing the final year, Sakina is given a goodbye present, the little Taj Mahal antique by Tara.

Later, Tara's parents, Jaideep Singh, and two sisters are seen weeping in Pakistan as they did not return to Amritsar before the partition. Tara's Muslim friend meets the family and requests them to stay with him as parents love both friends equally (like sons). But Tara's parents and sisters disagree. They reluctantly decide to leave. While leaving for the station, Tara's father and mother give their daughters two paper pouches. The bewildered twins ask them what that is. Father says that the sisters should not hesitate to give up their lives lest any Muslim attacks and shatters them and their dignity. Then the family reaches the station and boards the train. After some time, a large Muslim mob attacks the whole train consisting of Hindu and Sikh refugees. People run to save themselves, but they are killed gruesomely. Tara's sister hastily tries to eat the poison, but two men throw it from their hands and kill them after cruel physical abuse. The train, which was full of dead bodies of Hindus and Sikhs, has just arrived at Amritsar station, East Punjab. Tara, along with other Hindus and Sikhs waiting to pick up their relatives at the station, saw that their relatives were slaughtered inside the train. By seeing it, the Hindus and Sikhs formed a strong squad in East Punjab and retaliated in the same manner along with Tara Singh and massacred every Muslim in Amritsar station trying to flee to Pakistan.

Subsequently, and back in the present, they reach Tara's house. He explains his applying sindoor doesn't mean anything as he did this only to save her life, and she is safe there at his house. Also, he explains that he understands there is a huge difference between them as she is stunning and rich. After learning from the local railway station about her parents' demise, Sakina starts living in Tara's house. After overhearing Tara's aunt's comments about how society is reacting towards Tara's family that he is keeping a Muslim (outcast according to them), she insists Tara take her to a Muslim refugee camp as she doesn't want to overburden him anymore. Before Tara and Sakina head out towards Lahore, Sakina insists that she had learned about Tara's love for her by reading his secret diary but doesn't say anything. After reaching the border and realizing her love for him, she proposes to him for marriage. They get married and become parents of a baby boy named Jeete. Their life seems like a bed of roses until Sakina sees an old newspaper during Holi festival that has a photograph of her father, Ashraf Ali (Amrish Puri) indicating that her parents are alive.

Her father is now the mayor of Lahore. When Sakina calls him from the Pakistani Embassy in Delhi, he arranges to fly her to Lahore. However, Tara and their son, who is supposed to accompany her to Lahore, are told at the last minute that their visa formalities have not been completed, which compels them to stay in India. Sakina leaves with a heavy heart. She meets her whole clan back in Lahore. Everyone is thrilled to see her. Later, when she wants to return to India, her mom tells her that she was about to be disowned as people were babbling about her staying with an Indian Jat. Her father, too, relates all of their hardships during the journey from India to Pakistan. Sakina is hurt and heart-broken. But she starts protesting when her parents' friends start using her post-marriage life as a publicity stunt and depict her in-laws badly to extract more sympathy and votes from the Pakistani population. Later she is introduced to a very handsome guy who hails from a very influential rich family. She is told that she would be marrying him. But Sakina refuses and even asks the Qazi Saheb to leave her alone, saying second marriage during the husband's lifetime is a sin. Her parents and Mamaji are irate about that. They forcibly lock her up in a room inside the palace.

After learning they will not get a visa, Tara and his son, accompanied by a friend, enter Pakistan illegally at the border. Tara tries to take shelter in his old friend's house but hearing his wife fight about that. He leaves the place with his son Jeet and his assistant. There they find out that Sakina is getting married and reach her before the marriage takes place. Mother and son reunite happily. A fight is about to break out when the priest stops them, as this can end up harming Sakina's father's career in politics. Ashraf Ali agrees to their marriage under two conditions: they should live in Pakistan, and Tara should convert to Islam. These conditions are accepted by Tara in public the next day, which was against Ashraf Ali's plans. He makes Tara insult his country to prove that he is a true Pakistani, which enrages him, and this makes him kill some member of the large mob that Ashraf hired to kill him. Tara, Sakina, their son, and a friend manage to escape. Tara and Sakina escape from the city and hide in a poor couple's cottage near the border forest. But the man's wife is a greedy woman who wants all of Sakina's ornaments for herself. She refuses to listen to her husband and tries to throw Sakina out of the house when she does not get more jewelry.

But after Sakina leaves with Jeet and Tara, Ashraf Ali reaches the cottage and relocates his daughter. After a long period of turmoil, they catch a cotton mill train bound for India. Ashraf Ali finds out, and he takes some men to stop them. In the ensuing fight, Sakina gets shot by her own father. In the hospital, Sakina has lapsed into a coma. She gains consciousness after having a nightmare. The movie ends with Ashraf Ali accepting Tara as his son-in-law, and they return to India.

Cast
Sunny Deol as Tara Singh
Ameesha Patel as Sakeena "Sakku" Ali Singh, Tara Singh's wife
Amrish Puri as Mayor Ashraf Ali, Sakeena's father and Tara Singh's father-in-law
Lillete Dubey as Shabana Ali, Sakeena's mother and Tara Singh's mother-in-law
Vivek Shauq as Darmiyaan Singh, Tara Singh's best friend
Utkarsh Sharma as Charanjeet "Jeete" Singh, Tara Singh and Sakeena's son
Suresh Oberoi as Taya, Kulwant Singh, Tara Singh's elder uncle
Madhu Malti as Gurjeet Singh, Tara Singh's elder aunt
Pramod Moutho as Sandeep Singh, Tara Singh's father
Kanika Shivpuri as Parmeet Singh, Tara Singh's mother
Mushtaq Khan as Gulraaz Khan
Dolly Bindra as Samira Khan
Ahsaan Khan as Abdul Ali
Tony Mirchandani as Sarfaraz Ali
Samar Jai Singh as Salim Ali
Gyan Prakash as Wali Mohammed
Vikrant Chaturvedi as Kalim
Rakesh Bedi as Chandrakant Vaidya
Vishwajeet Pradhan as Daroga Suleiman
Ishrat Ali as Qazi of Ali family
Mithilesh Chaturvedi as Idris, Editor of Jung daily newspaper.
B.N. Sharma as Iqbal, Officer of Pakistan High Consulate in Delhi
Pratima Kazmi as Greedy Woman
Amita Khopkar as Bano
Santosh Gupta as Chanta
Abhay Bhargava as Indian Army Officer
Shweta Shinde as Sakina Friend, girls Boarding Hostel
Om Puri as the narrator
Production
A part of Gadar: Ek Prem Katha was shot at Bishop Cotton School, Shimla and at other several locations in Shimla. A part of it was also shot in Sacred Heart Senior Secondary School, Dalhousie. Although the film was set in 1947, it features the music of "Que sera sera" which was first published in 1956.

The movie was also shot in the city of Lucknow & Rudauli, Uttar Pradesh where the city was depicted as Lahore, Pakistan, and parts were shot at La Martiniere Boys School, Lucknow. Some parts were shot at Irshad Manzil Palace, Rudauli, Uttar Pradesh. A significant part was shot in Pathankot, Sarna and Amritsar to depict the division-torn country.[13]

Reception
Ruchi Sharma of Rediff.com said that "Gadar - Ek Prem Katha comes close to being fantastic, even though it is overheated in bits. Not to miss, this".[14] Film critic Taran Adarsh opined that "On the whole, GADAR is worth the watch for its brilliant dramatic and confrontation sequences, splendid performances and touching moments that overpower the two flaws in the film ? the excessive length (the narrative needs to be trimmed by at least 15 minutes in the second half!) and a weak musical score".[15]

Box office
Gadar: Ek Prem Katha collected ₹1.33 billion (US$17 million)[6] in its initial theatrical run and its adjusted gross is ₹4.86 billion (US$61 million) as per 2017 ticket sales. It was declared an All-Time Blockbuster by Box Office India.[16] Gadar: Ek Prem Katha ranks among the top 3 Indian films in all-time highest footfalls since 1990s.[17] In the United Kingdom, Gadar: Ek Prem Katha grossed around £280,000.[18]

Soundtrack
Gadar: Ek Prem Katha
Soundtrack album by Uttam Singh
Released	2001 (India)
Label	T-Series (2001-2013)
Zee Music Company (2014 present)
Producer	Uttam Singh
Uttam Singh chronology
Farz
(2001)	Gadar: Ek Prem Katha
(2001)	Pyaar Diwana Hota Hai
(2002)
 
The music of Gadar: Ek Prem Katha was composed by Uttam Singh. Lyrics (all songs) were written by Anand Bakshi.

According to the Indian trade website Box Office India, the soundtrack sold approximately 2.5 million copies.[19]

Song	Singer(s)
"Udja Kale Kawan - Folk"	Udit Narayan
"Musafir Jaane Wale"	Udit Narayan, Preeti Uttam
"Main Nikla Gaddi Leke"	Udit Narayan
"Udja Kale Kawan - Marriage"	Udit Narayan, Alka Yagnik
"Hum Juda Ho Gaye"	Udit Narayan, Preeti Uttam
"Udja Kale Kawan - Search"	Udit Narayan, Alka Yagnik, Nihar S.
"Aan Milo Sajna"	Pandit Ajoy Chakrabarty, Parveen Sultana
"Traditional Shaadi"	--
Awards
Winner:

Filmfare Special Performance Award - Ameesha Patel
Filmfare Best Action Award - Tinnu Verma
Zee Cine Special Award for Outstanding Performance - Male - Sunny Deol
Star Screen Award for Best Actor - Sunny Deol
Sansui Best Actor Award - Sunny Deol
Sansui Best Actress Award - Ameesha Patel
Annual Filmgoers Awards - Best Actress - Ameesha Patel
Nominated:

Filmfare Best Film Award - Nitin Keni
Filmfare Best Director Award - Anil Sharma
Filmfare Best Actor Award - Sunny Deol
Filmfare Best Actress Award - Ameesha Patel
Filmfare Best Music Director Award - Uttam Singh
Filmfare Best Lyricist Award - Anand Bakshi
Filmfare Best Male Playback Award - Udit Narayan
Filmfare Best Villain Award - Amrish Puri
IIFA Best Movie Award - Nitin Keni
IIFA Best Director Award - Anil Sharma
IIFA Best Actor Award - Sunny Deol
IIFA Best Actress Award - Ameesha Patel
Star Screen Best Film Award - Nitin Keni
Star Screen Best Director Award - Anil Sharma
Star Screen Best Actress Award - Ameesha Patel
Zee Cine Award for Best Film - Nitin Keni
Zee Cine Award for Best Director - Anil Sharma
Zee Cine Award for Best Actor - Male - Sunny Deol
Zee Cine Award for Best Actor - Female - Ameesha Patel
Zee Cine Award for Best Actor in a Negative Role - Amrish Puri
Sequel
Main article: Gadar 2
A sequel titled Gadar 2: The Katha Continues, was announced on 15 October 2021 with the release of a motion poster starring Sunny Deol, Ameesha Patel and Utkarsh Sharma in the lead roles. Anil Sharma will direct the film sequel with Zee Studios producing the film. The film is slated to release in 2022.[20]

See also
List of highest-grossing Bollywood films
Shaheed-e-Mohabbat Boota Singh, 1999 Indian Punjabi-language film
References
 "Gadar Ek Prem Katha (15)". BBFC. Retrieved 14 June 2022.
 Shubhra Gupta. "Blockbuster bucks trend". The Hindu Business Line. Retrieved 20 August 2001.
 "Gadar - Ek Prem Katha - Movie - Box Office India". 17 July 2016. Archived from the original on 17 July 2016.
 Anupama Chopra (31 December 2001). "Historic break - Society & The Arts News - Issue Date: Dec 31, 2001". India Today. Retrieved 12 February 2021.
 "Religious protests against period film Gadar put free speech on the boil". India Today.
 "Gadar - Ek Prem Katha - Movie - Box Office India". boxofficeindia.com.
 "Industry And Critics Like 'Gadar' And Called It Greatest: Ek Prem Katha, Reveals The Team!". IndiaTimes. 19 October 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2021.
 "The Biggest Blockbusters Ever In Hindi Cinema". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 4 October 2012.
 "Bahubali 2 Is The Biggest Hindi Blockbuster This Century - Box Office India". www.boxofficeindia.com.
 "Top Hits All Time - Box Office India". boxofficeindia.com.
 "Top India Footfalls All Time". Archived from the original on 15 August 2015.
 "5 must-watch Bollywood films on the Partition". Retrieved 14 August 2014.
 "Principal Controller of Defence Accounts (Central Command)". pcdacc.gov.in.
 Sharma, Ruchi (15 June 2001). "Review: Gadar - Ek Prema Katha". Rediff.com.
 Adarsh, Taran (12 June 2001). "Gadar – Ek Prem Katha Movie Review: Gadar – Ek Prem Katha Movie". Bollywood Hungama.
 "Top Hits All Time Blockbuster - - Box Office India". boxofficeindia.com. Retrieved 24 May 2017.
 "Top India Footfalls All Time". boxofficeindia.com. Retrieved 24 May 2017.
 Chopra, Anupama (4 November 2005). "Location impacts power of stars". Variety. Retrieved 21 August 2017.
 "Music Hits 2000–2009 (Figures in Units)". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 15 February 2008. Retrieved 12 July 2017.
 "Gadar 2: Sunny Deol confirms sequel on Dussehra, says 'the katha continues'". Indian Express.
Bibliography
Banaji, S. (23 May 2006). "Politics and Spectatorship 1: Viewing Love, Religion and Violence". Reading 'Bollywood': The Young Audience and Hindi Films. Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 147–52. ISBN 978-0-230-50120-1.
Dwyer, Rachel (15 June 2014). Bollywood's India: Hindi Cinema as a Guide to Contemporary India. Reaktion Books. p. 50. ISBN 978-1-78023-304-8.
Bhattacharya, Nandini (7 May 2013). Hindi Cinema: Repeating the Subject. Routledge. p. 169. ISBN 978-1-136-18986-9.
Sinha, Babli (25 February 2014). South Asian Transnationalisms: Cultural Exchange in the Twentieth Century. Routledge. p. 135. ISBN 978-1-135-71832-9.
Cunningham, Douglas A.; Nelson, John C. (28 March 2016). A Companion to the War Film. John Wiley & Sons. p. 310. ISBN 978-1-118-33761-5.
Bharat, Meenakshi; Kumar, Nirmal (27 April 2012). Filming the Line of Control: The Indo–Pak Relationship Through the Cinematic Lens. Routledge. p. 161. ISBN 978-1-136-51606-1.
Dwyer, Rachel (1 December 2005). 100 Bollywood Films. Roli Books Pvt. Ltd. p. 74. ISBN 978-81-7436-990-1.
Mehta, Rini Bhattacharya; Mookerjea-Leonard, Debali (17 December 2014). The Indian Partition in Literature and Films: History, Politics, and Aesthetics. Routledge. p. 4. ISBN 978-1-317-66994-4.
Dadhe, Kasturi (2009). "Religious and Nationalist Trends in Modern Bollywood Cinema". Zeitschrift für Anglistik und Amerikanistik. 57 (1). doi:10.1515/zaa.2009.57.1.9. ISSN 2196-4726. S2CID 164058417.
Sharma, Manoj (2010). "Portrayal of Partition in Hindi Cinema". Proceedings of the Indian History Congress. 70: 1155–60. JSTOR 44147759.
Bose, Nandana (Spring 2009). "The Hindu right and the politics of censorship: three case studies of policing Hindi Cinema, 1992-2002". Velvet Light Trap. 63 (63): 22. doi:10.1353/vlt.0.0029. S2CID 152796337 – via General OneFile.
External links
Gadar: Ek Prem Katha at IMDb
Gadar: Ek Prem Katha at Bollywood Hungama
Portal:
icon Bollywood
Categories: 2001 films2000s Hindi-language films2000s action drama filmsIndian action drama filmsMilitary of Pakistan in filmsIndian historical action filmsIndia–Pakistan relations in popular cultureIndian interfaith romance filmsFilms scored by Uttam SinghFilms set in the partition of IndiaFilms set in LahoreFilms set in Punjab, IndiaFilms set in Punjab, PakistanFilms shot in LucknowFilms shot in Punjab, IndiaFilms shot in Himachal PradeshFilms directed by Anil Sharma2000s historical action films
Navigation menu
Not logged in
Talk
Contributions
Create account
Log in
ArticleTalk
ReadEditView history
Search
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
Donate
Contribute
Help
Learn to edit
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Wikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
বাংলা
فارسی
Français
हिन्दी
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
മലയാളം
3 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 13 September 2022, at 23:39 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaMobile viewDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki
